Day 22: The Deployment
======================

With the configuration of the cache system in the 21st day, the Jobeet website
is ready to be ~deployed|Deployment~ on the production servers.

During twenty-two days, we have developed Jobeet on a development machine, and
for most of you, it probably means your local machine; except if you develop on
the production server directly, which is of course a very bad idea. Now, it is
time to move the website to a production server.

Now, we will see what needs to be done before going to production, what kind of
~deploying strategies|Deploying Strategies~ you can use, and also the tools you
need for a successful deployment.

Preparing the Production ~Server|Web Server~
--------------------------------------------

Before deploying the project to production, we need to be sure the production
server is configured correctly. You can re-read day 1, where we explained
how to configure the web server.

In this section, we assume that you have already installed the web server, the
database server, and PHP 5.2.4 or later.

>**NOTE**
>If you don't have an SSH access to the web server, skip the part where you
>need to have access to the command line.

### Server Configuration

First, you need to check that PHP is installed with all the needed extensions
and is correctly configured. As for day 1, we will use the
`check_configuration.php` script provided with symfony. As we won't install
symfony on the production server, download the file directly from the symfony
website:

    http://trac.symfony-project.org/browser/branches/1.4/data/bin/check_configuration.php?format=raw

Copy the file to the web root directory and run it from your browser **and**
from the command line:

    $ php check_configuration.php

Fix any fatal error the script finds and repeat the process until everything
works fine in **both** environments.

### PHP ~Accelerator~

For the production server, you probably want the best performance possible.
Installing a [PHP accelerator](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PHP_accelerator)
will give you the best improvement for your money.

>**NOTE**
>From Wikipedia: A PHP accelerator works by caching the compiled bytecode of
>PHP scripts to avoid the overhead of parsing and compiling source code on
>each request.

[~APC~](http://www.php.net/apc) is one of the most popular one, and it is quite
simple to install:

    $ pecl install APC

Depending on your Operating System, you will also be able to install it with the
OS native package manager.

>**NOTE**
>Take some time to learn how to
>[configure APC](http://www.php.net/manual/en/apc.configuration.php).

The symfony Libraries
---------------------

### Embedding symfony

One of the great strengths of symfony is that a project is self-contained. All
the files needed for the project to work are under the main root project
directory. And you can move around the project in another directory without
changing anything in the project itself as symfony only uses relative paths. It
means that the directory on the production server does not have to be the same
as the one on your development machine.

The only absolute path that can possibly be found is in the
`config/ProjectConfiguration.class.php` file; but we took care of it during
day 1. Check that it actually contains a relative path to the symfony core
autoloader:

    [php]
    // config/ProjectConfiguration.class.php
    require_once dirname(__FILE__).'/../lib/vendor/symfony/lib/autoload/sfCoreAutoload.class.php';

### ~Upgrading~ symfony

Even if everything is self-contained in a single directory, upgrading symfony to
a newer release is nonetheless insanely easy.

You will want to upgrade symfony to the latest minor release from time to time,
as we constantly fix bugs and possibly security issues. The good news is that
all symfony versions are maintained for at least a year and during the
maintenance period, we never ever add new features, even the smallest one. So,
it is always fast, safe, and secure to upgrade from one minor release to
another.

Upgrading symfony is as simple as changing the content of the
`lib/vendor/symfony/` directory. If you have installed symfony with the archive,
remove the current files and replace them with the newest ones.

If you use ~Subversion~ for your project, you can also link your project to the
latest symfony 1.4 tag:

    $ svn propedit svn:externals lib/vendor/
      # symfony http://svn.symfony-project.com/tags/RELEASE_1_4_3/

Upgrading symfony is then as simple as changing the tag to the latest symfony
version.

You can also use the 1.4 branch to have fixes in real-time:

    $ svn propedit svn:externals lib/vendor/
      # symfony http://svn.symfony-project.com/branches/1.4/

Now, each time you do an `svn up`, you will have the latest symfony 1.4 version.

When upgrading to a new version, you are advised to always clear the cache,
especially in the production environment:

    $ php symfony cc

>**TIP**
>If you also have an FTP access to the production server, you can simulate a
>`symfony cc` by simply removing all the files and directories under the
>`cache/` directory.

You can even test a new symfony version without replacing the existing one. If
you just want to test a new release, and want to be able to rollback easily,
install symfony in another directory (`lib/vendor/symfony_test` for instance),
change the path in the `ProjectConfiguration` class, clear the cache, and you
are done. Rollbacking is as simple as removing the directory, and change back
the path in `ProjectConfiguration`.

Tweaking the ~Configuration~
----------------------------

### Database Configuration

Most of the time, the production database has different credentials than the
local one. Thanks to the symfony environments, it is quite simple to have a
different configuration for the production database:

    $ php symfony configure:database
       ➥ "mysql:host=localhost;dbname=prod_dbname" prod_user prod_pass

You can also edit the `databases.yml` configuration file directly.

### ~Assets~

As Jobeet uses ~plugins|Plugins Assets~ that embed assets, symfony created
relative symbolic links in the `web/` directory. The `plugin:publish-assets`
task regenerates or creates them if you install plugins without the
`plugin:install` task:

    $ php symfony plugin:publish-assets

### ~Customizing|Customization~ ~Error Pages~

Before going to production, it is better to customize ~default symfony
pages|Default symfony Pages~, like the "~Page Not Found|404 Error~" page, or the
default exception page.

We have already configured the error page for the `YAML` format during day
15, by creating an `error.yaml.php` and an `exception.yaml.php` files in the
`config/error/` directory. The `error.yaml.php` file is used by symfony in the
`prod` environment, whereas `exception.yaml.php` is used in the `dev`
environment.

So, to customize the default ~exception|Exception Handling~ page for the HTML
~format|Formats~, create two files: `config/error/error.html.php` and
`config/error/exception.html.php`.

The `404` page (page not found) can be customized by changing the
`error_404_module` and `error_404_action` settings:

    [yml]
    # apps/frontend/config/settings.yml
    all:
      .actions:
        error_404_module: default
        error_404_action: error404

Customizing the Directory ~Structure~
-------------------------------------

To better structure and standardize your code, symfony has a default directory
structure with pre-defined names. But sometimes, you don't have the choice but
to change the structure because of some external constraints.

Configuring the directory names can be done in the
`config/ProjectConfiguration.class.php` class.

### The ~Web Root Directory~

On some web hosts, you cannot change the web root directory name. Let's say that
on your web host, it is named `public_html/` instead of `web/`:

    [php]
    // config/ProjectConfiguration.class.php
    class ProjectConfiguration extends sfProjectConfiguration
    {
      public function setup()
      {
        $this->setWebDir($this->getRootDir().'/public_html');
      }
    }

The `setWebDir()` method takes the absolute path of the web root directory. If
you also move this directory elsewhere, don't forget to edit the controller
scripts to check that paths to the `config/ProjectConfiguration.class.php` file
are still valid:

    [php]
    require_once(dirname(__FILE__).'/../config/ProjectConfiguration.class.php');

### The ~Cache~ and ~Log|Logging~ Directory

The symfony framework only writes in two directories: `cache/` and `log/`. For
~security|Security~ reasons, some web hosts do not set ~write permissions|Write
Permissions~ in the main directory. If this is the case, you can move these
directories elsewhere on the filesystem:

    [php]
    // config/ProjectConfiguration.class.php
    class ProjectConfiguration extends sfProjectConfiguration
    {
      public function setup()
      {
        $this->setCacheDir('/tmp/symfony_cache');
        $this->setLogDir('/tmp/symfony_logs');
      }
    }

As for the `setWebDir()` method, `setCacheDir()` and `setLogDir()` take an
absolute path to the `cache/` and `log/` directories respectively.

Customizing symfony core Objects (aka factories)
------------------------------------------------

During day 16, we talked a bit about the symfony factories. Being able to
customize the factories means that you can use a custom class for symfony core
objects instead of the default one. You can also change the default behavior of
these classes by changing the parameters send to them.

Let's take a look at some classic customizations you may want to do.

### ~Cookie|Cookies~ Name

To handle the ~user session|Session~, symfony uses a cookie. This cookie has a
default name of `symfony`, which can be changed in `factories.yml`. Under the
`all` key, add the following configuration to change the cookie name to
`jobeet`:

    [yml]
    # apps/frontend/config/factories.yml
    storage:
      class: sfSessionStorage
      param:
        session_name: jobeet

### ~Session|Session (Storage)~ ~Storage|Storages~

The default session storage class is `sfSessionStorage`. It uses the filesystem
to store the session information. If you have several web servers, you would
want to store the sessions in a central place, like a database table:

    [yml]
    # apps/frontend/config/factories.yml
    storage:
      class: sfPDOSessionStorage
      param:
        session_name: jobeet
        db_table:     session
<propel>
        database:     propel
</propel>
<doctrine>
        database:     doctrine
</doctrine>
        db_id_col:    id
        db_data_col:  data
        db_time_col:  time

### Session Timeout

By default, the user ~session timeout|Session (Timeout)~ if `1800` seconds. This
can be changed by editing the `user` entry:

    [yml]
    # apps/frontend/config/factories.yml
    user:
      class: myUser
      param:
        timeout: 1800

### ~Logging~

By default, there is no logging in the `prod` ~environment|Environments~ because
the logger class name is `sfNoLogger`:

    [yml]
    # apps/frontend/config/factories.yml
    prod:
      logger:
        class:   sfNoLogger
        param:
          level:   err
          loggers: ~

You can for instance enable logging on the filesystem by changing the logger
class name to `sfFileLogger`:

    [yml]
    # apps/frontend/config/factories.yml
    logger:
      class: sfFileLogger
      param:
        level:   err
        loggers: ~
        file:    %SF_LOG_DIR%/%SF_APP%_%SF_ENVIRONMENT%.log

>**NOTE**
>In the `factories.yml` configuration file, `%XXX%` strings are replaced with
>their corresponding value from the `sfConfig` object. So, `%SF_APP%` in a
>configuration file is equivalent to `sfConfig::get('sf_app')` in PHP code.
>This notation can also be used in the `app.yml` configuration file. It is
>very useful when you need to reference a path in a configuration file without
>hardcoding the path (`SF_ROOT_DIR`, `SF_WEB_DIR`, ...).

~Deploying~
-----------

### What to deploy?

When deploying the Jobeet website to the production server, we need to be
careful not to deploy unneeded files or override files uploaded by our users,
like the company logos.

In a symfony project, there are three directories to exclude from the transfer:
`cache/`, `log/`, and `web/uploads/`. Everything else can be transfered as is.

For security reasons, you also don't want to transfer the "non-production" front
controllers, like the `frontend_dev.php`, `backend_dev.php` and
`frontend_cache.php` scripts.

### Deploying Strategies

In this section, we will assume that you have full control over the production
server(s). If you can only access the server with a FTP account, the only
deployment solution possible is to transfer all files every time you deploy.

The simplest way to deploy your website is to use the built-in `project:deploy`
~task|Tasks~. It uses ~`SSH`~ and ~`rsync`~ to connect and transfer the files
from one computer to another one.

Servers for the `project:deploy` task can be configured in the
`config/properties.ini` configuration file:

    [ini]
    # config/properties.ini
    [production]
      host=www.jobeet.org
      port=22
      user=jobeet
      dir=/var/www/jobeet/

To deploy to the newly configured `production` server, use the `project:deploy`
task:

    $ php symfony project:deploy production

>**NOTE**
>Before running the `project:deploy` task for the first time, you need to 
>connect to the server manually to add the key in the known hosts file.

-

>**TIP**
>If the command does not work as expected, you can pass the `-t` option to
>see the real-time output of the `rsync` command.

If you run this command, symfony will only simulate the transfer. To actually
deploy the website, add the `--go` option:

    $ php symfony project:deploy production --go

>**NOTE**
>Even if you can provide the SSH password in the `properties.ini` file, it is
>better to configure your server with a SSH key to allow password-less
>connections.

By default, symfony won't transfer the directories we have talked about in the
previous section, nor it will transfer the `dev` front controller script. That's
because the `project:deploy` task exclude files and directories are configured
in the `config/rsync_exclude.txt` file:

    # config/rsync_exclude.txt
    .svn
    /web/uploads/*
    /cache/*
    /log/*
    /web/*_dev.php

For Jobeet, we need to add the `frontend_cache.php` file:

    # config/rsync_exclude.txt
    .svn
    /web/uploads/*
    /cache/*
    /log/*
    /web/*_dev.php
    /web/frontend_cache.php

>**TIP**
>You can also create a `config/rsync_include.txt` file to force some files or
>directories to be transfered.

Even if the `project:deploy` task is very flexible, you might want to customize
it even further. As deploying can be very different based on your server
configuration and topology, don't hesitate to extend the default task.

Each time you deploy a website to production, don't forget to at least clear the
configuration cache on the production server:

    $ php symfony cc --type=config

If you have changed some routes, you will also need to clear the routing cache:

    $ php symfony cc --type=routing

>**NOTE**
>Clearing the cache selectively allows to keep some parts of the cache, such
>as the template cache.

Final Thoughts
--------------

The deployment of a project is the very last step of the symfony development
life-cycle. It does not mean that you are done. This is quite the contrary. A
website is something that has a life by itself. You will probably have to fix
bugs and you will also want to add new features over time. But thanks to the
symfony structure and the tools at your disposal, upgrading your website is
simple, fast, and safe.

Tomorrow, will be the last day of the Jobeet tutorial. It will be time to take a
step back and have a look at what you learned during the twenty-three days of
Jobeet.

__ORM__
